In this guided exercise,
we are going to create 2,
actually 3 tests, 2
Java based and 1 native
one. Starting with lab
test-junit start script,
we will be able to join the DO378/labs/test-
junit/ directory where we have
our sample expenses resource,
of course expenses microservice.
But we also have two test files.
If we have a look at those test files,
they do not really contain
too much useful code.
The ExpensesCreationTest does have
some cleanDatabase method which is
supposed to be involved before every test.
But it's got an empty
test method called
testCreateExpense and it's
not properly annotated.
So probably the injection here will break.
The other one, the EndPointTest
is even empty.
I just got expensesURI.getPort test.
That expects the test instance of
Quarkus to be listening on port 8888,
but as well is not annotated
and is missing a couple of resource
injection annotations as well.
So if we try to run the tests,
they simply blow up.
As you can see, there is a
NullPointerException in
the EndPointTest because the
resource injection does not work.
And the ExpensesCreationTest
does nothing really.
So let's fix this. First,
let's annotate the classes.
So ExpenseCreationTest needs a
quarkus.test import in an annotation.
The same for the EndPointTest.
We add a QuarkusTest import
and a @QuarkusTest annotation.
Then we move on to the EndPointTest
finishing.
What we need is to annotate
the expensesURI with
the @TestHTTPResource and
@TestHTTPEndpoint annotation,
where the latter is pointing to the
expenses resource ExpenseResource.class,
which is what we are actually
testing in the method.
For this to work,
we also need to change the test port
in application.properties file.
So we will just be adding 1 property at
the end called quarkus.http.test-port and
setting it to 8888.
It should take care
of the EndPointTest,
now let's have a look at
the ExpensesCreationTest.
Right! So the first thing
is we needed to annotate
the cleanDatabase method with
@BeforeEach annotation, ofcourse,
we had to import that too.
The create expense could be
implemented now in all manner
of different approaches,
but I have decided to use RESTAssured.
So I will be using some restassured
static imports like given
and when, some hamcrest static
imports like containsString is.
And I will need the Expense.PaymentMethod
import and the ContentType
from restassured,
such as to construct request and
of course, validate the response.
So what I am doing here is, I will be
setting up the given condition.
We say, ok, we have a
request body of type Expense,
where we use the following browsers to
construct it and the content we want
it to be serialized into is JSON
and we are going to post it to /expenses.
Now, when we get the
expenses, after doing that,
we expect the status code to be 200
and the body size should be 1
and the body should contain a string,
including name set to Test Expense
paymentMethod to be set to whatever
PaymentMethod CASH is and the amount
being set to 1234.0.
So this is the assertion that
we test for after having
posted a new Expense to
the expenses endpoint.
Now, I can't just run test
yet because I will be
getting a bunch of errors about missing
restassured and missing hamcrest.
So I need to actually add
the rest-assured dependency
with the test scope to pom.xml.
After that, the test will run,
but we get an error about not
being able to connect to Postgres.
That is because the expenses service
expects the Postgres
database to be running.
So what we need to do is actually
swap the Postgres database with
an in-memory one during testing.
For that purpose, we will be editing
the ExpensesCreationTest again,
adding the QuarkusTestResource and
the H2DatabaseTestResource imports
and annotate the entire class
with the QuarkusTestResource
(H2DatabaseTestResource.class).
Now that's as far as test is concerned,
now we have to also add H2
database dependency to pom.xml.
So we need quarkus-test-h2,
that one contains the H2DatabaseTestResource.class.
And of course it only
needs a scope of test.
Next, we need to configure the test
profile in application.properties,
we need to add the quarkus.datasource.db-kind set to h2; quarkus.datasource.
jdbc.url set to localhost/mem:
test and quarkus.hibernate-orm.dialect
being set to H2Dialect
such as hibernate can talk to our H2database,
all of these in the
test section in the test profile of
our configuration. For the database
driver to be available during testing,
we also need to add
quarkus-jdbc-h2 dependency
again, only with the test scope,
we don't needed it in the other phase.
Now, when running the test,
we can see that the 3
dependencies are loaded
and here we have H2
database reporting that
the TCP server is running at port
9092 only for local connections,
which means that the Quarkus test
resource annotation is doing
its job and the tests
execute successfully.
And that is great.
Now that the Java tests have succeeded,
let's create a native test.
And a native test isn't
just as simple as creating
another class named something
test.java. Is if we do that,
even if we run the test phase or the
test goal in the native profile,
we'll be mixing Java
tests and native tests.
So it's not actually a good idea to
have both Java and native
test called the same.
That's why we usually
put native tests into
the integration test phase which
is invoked using mvn verify.
mvn verify in native
mode of course would,
then first build the native
executable and then treat the native tests as
integration tests, right? So we
have to call them native test IT
dot java or native check IT
dot java, it has to end in IT dot java.
And what's specific about native test
is that you cannot use any injection,
as we already said, you cannot use
any particular Quarkus
lifecycle control for
external resources with any
benefit because you are
running the native test
in the prod profile.
Now while there is an option
to use a Quarkus property to
specify which profile you want
to switch to in the native test,
be aware that any additional codes such as
jdbc drivers and external dependency,
resource configuration,
and additional
classes have already been built
into the native executable.
So there is no easy way to switch
between an actual database
in an in-memory database.
We have to be careful with
these things a little bit.
Now once these are cleared,
what we can do is we can just simply
take the existing ExpensesCreationTests,
for example, as a template,
copy it into NativeExpensesCreationIT.
java, note how the file ends in IT.
And then change a couple of things.
The changes are basically
that we are going to throw
out the QuarkusTest annotation.
We are going to throw out the QuarkusTestResource and
H2DatabaseTestResource.
As we said, we cannot switch
jdbc drivers on the fly.
Our production profile is
configured to use Postgres,
so we can't use H2.
We are going to remove the @QuarkusTest
and @QuarkusTestResource annotations
and of course we are going to
have to rename the tests into
NativeExpensesCreationIT.
Instead of QuarkusTest annotation,
we will be using the NativeImageTest annotation
And apart from removing
the cleanDatabase method which relies
on the injection of entityManager,
which is something we cannot do.
So what we will be doing is essentially just
that, annotating the NativeExpensesCreationIT
as a NativeImageTest.
Changing nothing else about it,
the client code that actually
invokes the endpoint is correct.
We just really need to make sure that
we remove the code that relies on
injection and that we remove
any external resource lifecycle
management annotations.
Once you've done that, as I said,
we could just as well selected the -Dquarkus.
test.native-image-profile
and set it to test.
But that would actually require us
to build in the H2 drivers as well
and just end up with the larger
executable without any good reason.
Now, looking at application.properties,
the option we do have for a
successful test is actually to start
a postgres container that
is configured to use expenses,
user, expenses password
and of course to create
an expenses database,
we will just run that in a container.
And actually, this is
something that I have done here.
Here we go.
So I have just mapped port 5432 on to host
5432 and use the environment
variables needed to run postgres,
serving the expenses database,
which is the equivalent of
the production settings here.
It's not the production database,
but it's going to be used for test,
like an integration test.
Right! We run the mvn
verify because the test is
now called it.java
in the native profile
and what we will see is
that the Java tests are
executed all the same because
I didn't explicitly skip them.
The native image is then built,
there we go.
And after the NativeImageBuild
completes in just over 2,
in just under 2.5 minutes,
we see that the integration tests starts
running NativeExpensesCreationIT.
We can see that the H2 database
was still started for some reason,
but it's not due to my code.
However, this is the,
command line use for
our native image application
and the integration test
executes successfully,
finishing in a BUILD SUCCESS.
All that remains now is
to run lab test-junit
finish and join us in the next video,
we are going to talk about
testing using mock frameworks.